The algorithms of spamcalc.

Last modified on 31 March 2002.


First, some definitions:
The hostname "this.is.a.c00l.hostname.nl" has several properties.
The tld (top-level domain) is "nl".
The domain is "hostname.nl".
The fields, six of them, are this, is, a, c00l, hostname and nl.


The spamcalc script uses a few simple tests to determine the spam score for
a hostname:
* field test
* number of fields test
* domain test

At the moment these are the only implemented tests. There are several more
tests that will be implemented in higher versions; for a list of those, check
the "todo" file.

Each hostname starts with a base score of 0 points. For each test, an amount
of points is added (or, rarely, subtracted). In the end a total score is
calculated.

Explanation of the tests:

* field test
Each field of the hostname, excluding the two last fields, is tested with 2
lists: a list of spammy words, and a list of spammy regexps. 
The list of words has entries like "is" with a penalty score of 81, and 
"likes" with a score of 73 points. This means that if a field corresponds 
exactly with an entry in the list of spamwords, it is awarded the amount of 
points for that spam word.
The list of regular expressions works in the same way. If a field is matched
by one of the regular expressions, more points are added.

* number of fields test
The total number of fields (which is the number of dots plus one) is counted
and a spam value is calculated. The more fields, the higher the spam value.

* domain test
The domain name is checked with the list of domains to see if the base score
should be changed from 0 to a lower (probably no dnsspam for this domain) or a
higher (lots of dnsspam hostnames from this domain) value.
Examples: the domain home.com has a penalty of -15 points (so actually a bonus
because home.com is known to make non-spammy hostnames) and g0d.nl has a
penalty of +18 points, thus making any hostname ending in .g0d.nl 18 points
closer to spam.

At the end, all these values are added and they form the final score.

Example:

calis:~/spam$ ./sc.pl -v this.is.a.c00l.hostname.nl
this.is.a.c00l.hostname.nl
Added 98 points for "this" via wordmatch.
Added 81 points for "is" via wordmatch.
Added 95 points for "a" via wordmatch.
Added 77 points for "c00l" via regexpmatch of ^[kc](oo|00)l.
Added 14 points for containing 6 fields.
Total of 365 for this.is.a.c00l.hostname.nl.

So this hostname is definitely spam. :)

